Update Cross-Client Compat Policy (#27064)
microsoft/FluidFramework: CrossClientCompatibility.md

Reviewer: Shouldn't we explain how "1" and "2" tie into "CC-1" and onward?

Author: I added a note below just below the table saying that. I was hestitant to add it to the table itself until we actually made the code change

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend following the below pattern to ensure cross-client compatibility. Keeping your compatibility configuration up-to-date on an ongoing basis ensures you are always within a safe compatibility window.
```

Or is there a reason we'd want consumers to think about these together?

Author: Sorry, not sure I understand the question, could you clarify?

Reviewer: Something went wrong with the suggested change.  I'm suggesting you remove this:

`While these steps are especially important when upgrading major versions of Fluid`

because I don't think major releases are of any concern here with the current plan.

Author: Good call, updated in latest

Reviewer 2: Internally, is there a minimum minVersionForCollab that can be explicitly set? There would be an error using trying to set a really old minVersionForCollab that current package set has assumed isn't possible. Yeah?

Author: Yes there is - `lowestMinVersionForCollab`. That is something we will also want to update regularly going forward

Reviewer 2: Currently I see it is 1.0.0 which I think means up until now we do allow collab with 1.4.
So, it would be new for 2.100 to not allow 1.x collab?

Author: Yes, that's correct, but based on the current table in `CompatibilityCheckpoints.md`, we wouldn't update `lowestMinVersionForCollab` until CC-5, since that would be the first CC to drop support for 1.x clients.

Reviewer: We need to discuss if/how we'll actually enforce this for Loader layer and DataStore layer.  Feels like it will require new protocol (op).

For DataStore layer, we may actually want to punt on that and actually say it's 24 months for DataStore layer.  You should talk with @TommyBrosman about how minVersionForCollab flows between Runtime and DataStore layer and how it's interpreted.

For Loader layer... yeah I'm not really sure what to say.  Adding a new op feels heavy-handed but maybe straightforward enough it's worth it.  Maybe it'd be easier to introduce a signal, or even consider plumbing client version through the connection to be included in the join Signal/op.  Brainstorming here.

Doesn't need to be solved in this PR, but will need to be addressed as part of this feature as a whole IMO.

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|

> | **Compatibility Checkpoint** | A Fluid release that marks a compatibility boundary. Checkpoints are published on a regular cadence and documented in the [Compatibility Checkpoints](./CompatibilityCheckpoints.md) page. The set of supported checkpoint releases defines the cross-client compatibility window. |

Reviewer: > The set of supported checkpoint releases defines the cross-client compatibility window

Can you elaborate on this?  IMO (see previous comment) this is misleading - The compatibility window is defined as a time range.

Author: Added clarifications in both docs in latest (I also responded to your other comment)

Reviewer: I would still suggest updating this wording, it's not clear to me what exactly it would mean.

Reviewer 2: I got to this and I also request rewording or removal... Why is "N" equal to "most recent"? Is "most recent" different than "current"? I think "N" should be "N" - it is any CC you chose.
With CC-# used commonly throughout, I don't think you need to name it. If you want to have something you could say that "Checkpoint N" is "CC-N, any individual compatibility checkpoint range. Checkpoint N-1 would be CC-(N-1), i.e. the compatibility checkpoint range before N.".

Author: Yeah I think that will be better - updated in latest

> | **Checkpoint N** | The most recent compatibility checkpoint release |

Reviewer 3: Maybe this should be phrased as "the current/in-progress compatibility checkpoint"?

Author: Hmm, I think I personally prefer the "most recent" phrasing. To me that is more clear/accurate than in-progress, but I'm interested in your reasoning for preferring "in-progress"

Reviewer 3: The reader's question I'm anticipating is "If 2.100 is the most-recent compatibility checkpoint release, and I'm on the newest published version 2.123 (no newer checkpoint has released yet), am I 'in' checkpoint N or am I 'after' checkpoint N".

I think the answer is 'in' given your more-recent clarification of rounding to the lower checkpoint, but might be nice if there is verbiage that will imply that more immediately.

Author: Ah gotcha. I think since then I added a note about that a bit lower, but it may be nice in the terminology section

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|
| **Compatibility Checkpoint** | A Fluid release that marks a compatibility boundary. Checkpoints are published on a regular cadence and documented in the [Compatibility Checkpoints](./CompatibilityCheckpoints.md) page. The set of supported checkpoint releases defines the cross-client compatibility window. |
| **Checkpoint N** | The most recent compatibility checkpoint release |
| **Checkpoint N-1** | The second most recent compatibility checkpoint release |
| **Checkpoint N-2** | The third most recent compatibility checkpoint release |
| **Saturation** | When an adequate percentage of an application's clients are running a certain version. The threshold that is considered adequate is defined by the application's requirements.  |

## Cross-Client Compatibility Policy

The Fluid Framework guarantees cross-client compatibility within an **18-month window**, enforced through
designated **compatibility checkpoints**. Checkpoints are published on a **6-month cadence** and identified
in the [Compatibility Checkpoints](./CompatibilityCheckpoints.md) page. Any two clients are compatible

> as long as their checkpoint releases are within ~18 months of each other (spanning Checkpoint N through Checkpoint N-3).

Reviewer 2: I think we are missing a note about compat with future versions. N is compatible with N+1 to +3 as well.

Author: In the terminology I defined N as the latest checkpoint, but I can see how that can be confusing. I added a note below to clarify, let me know what you think.

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|

> | **Compatibility Checkpoint** | A Fluid release that marks a compatibility boundary. Checkpoints are published on a regular cadence and documented in the [Compatibility Checkpoints](./CompatibilityCheckpoints.md) page. The set of supported checkpoint releases defines the cross-client compatibility window. |

Reviewer 4: As per my comment here `https://github.com/microsoft/FluidFramework/pull/27064/files#r3126943780`, this could be `Compatibility Checkpoint Release`.

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|
| **Compatibility Checkpoint Release** | The first Fluid release in a checkpoint range (e.g., `2.103.0` for CC-4). |
| **Compatibility Checkpoint Range** | The semver range of Fluid releases that are part of a checkpoint (e.g., `>=2.103.0 <2.133.0` for CC-4). All releases in the range share the same cross-client compatibility guarantees as the first release of the range. |
| **Checkpoint N** | The most recent compatibility checkpoint |
| **Checkpoint N-1** | The second most recent compatibility checkpoint |
| **Checkpoint N-2** | The third most recent compatibility checkpoint |

> | **Saturation** | When an adequate percentage of an application's clients are running a certain version. The threshold that is considered adequate is defined by the application's requirements. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Saturation** | When an adequate percentage of an application's clients are running a certain version. The specific percentage is defined by the application's requirements (not by Fluid Framework). |
```

## Cross-Client Compatibility Policy

The Fluid Framework guarantees cross-client compatibility within an **18-month window**, enforced through
designated **compatibility checkpoints**. A new Compatibility Checkpoint Release is published on a
**6-month cadence** and each checkpoint's Range spans until the next Compatibility Checkpoint Release.
Checkpoints are identified in the [Compatibility Checkpoints](./CompatibilityCheckpoints.md) page.
Any two clients are compatible as long as their checkpoints are within ~18 months of each other
(spanning Checkpoint N through Checkpoint N-3). Because a Range extends for ~6 months after the
opening Release, the effective compatibility window for a client toward the end of a Range can be
up to ~24 months.

> **Notes:**
>
> - `N` is defined as the latest checkpoint, but the window extends in both
>   directions. Any checkpoint is compatible with the 3 checkpoints before

> >   and after it.

Reviewer 2: I would remove this along the same lines as stated in https://github.com/microsoft/FluidFramework/pull/27064#discussion_r3140436959

2. **Feature gating**: It automatically enables or disables features based on the specified version to ensure all collaborating clients can understand the resulting data format. For example, if `minVersionForCollab` is set to `"2.0.0"`, features like grouped batching are safely enabled because all clients at version 2.0.0 or later can interpret that format.

If `minVersionForCollab` is not explicitly set, the runtime uses a default derived from the currently supported compatibility checkpoints. Passing a value below the supported floor is not permitted — the runtime will fail to instantiate and throw a `UsageError` (see [Errors and Warnings to Monitor](#errors-and-warnings-to-monitor)). For details on the default value, see `defaultMinVersionForCollab` in [compatibilityBase.ts](./packages/runtime/runtime-utils/src/compatibilityBase.ts).

### What This Means for an Application

> As an application developer, you need to manage your Fluid Framework version upgrades carefully to ensure uninterrupted collaboration for your users. It is **highly recommended** to explicitly configure `minVersionForCollab` and monitor your client version distribution. Setting `minVersionForCollab` explicitly surfaces version mismatches at build time. This prevents a release from shipping and silently raising the floor, locking older clients out.

Reviewer 2: Can we say "build and verification time"? Only when we cross majors might there be a build time error from typechecking. Customers will need to run to get the min version error.

2. **Feature gating**: It automatically enables or disables features based on the specified version to ensure all collaborating clients can understand the resulting data format. For example, if `minVersionForCollab` is set to `"2.0.0"`, features like grouped batching are safely enabled because all clients at version 2.0.0 or later can interpret that format.

If `minVersionForCollab` is not explicitly set, the runtime uses a default derived from the currently supported compatibility checkpoints. Passing a value below the supported floor is not permitted — the runtime will fail to instantiate and throw a `UsageError` (see [Errors and Warnings to Monitor](#errors-and-warnings-to-monitor)). For details on the default value, see `defaultMinVersionForCollab` in [compatibilityBase.ts](./packages/runtime/runtime-utils/src/compatibilityBase.ts).

### What This Means for an Application

> As an application developer, you need to manage your Fluid version upgrades carefully to ensure uninterrupted collaboration for your users. By configuring `minVersionForCollab` appropriately and monitoring your client version distribution, you can safely upgrade while maintaining compatibility across your user base.

Reviewer 2: I think we need more content here especially in light of the "automatically" increasing min version. Maybe there is an implication of "Fluid version upgrades" but it is not clear. (Also, while annoying, we should say "Fluid Framework" and not just "Fluid".)
We tell customers that that they can use `^` semantic versioning when using `@public` API set and range with `<2.##0` for `@beta` APIs, but they can get into trouble if they aren't using lockfiles to restrict resolution to something known. Or even if they are, then they need to watch those resolutions.

The best protection I can think of for this is to strongly recommend that they always explicitly set the min version. This ensures that mismatch in intentions is found at build or test time before being released and unintentionally altering documents locking older clients out.

#### Encapsulated vs Declarative Models

The cross-client compatibility policy applies to both application models. Both models use the same underlying enforcement and feature-gating mechanisms. They differ only in how you configure them, which is described in the sections below.

##### Scope by Layer

The 18-month policy above applies uniformly to every Fluid layer that
participates in cross-client communication (Loader, Runtime, Datastore / DDSes).
The Driver layer is the only exception — it has no cross-client interactions,
so any driver version is considered cross-client compatible with any other.

> This uniformity holds in both the declarative and encapsulated models; mixing

Reviewer 2: I think this is the only place where Encapsulated versus Declarative model is brought up - in all of the docs. It introduces a whole topic that really needs to exist elsewhere - it needs to have its own definition. If there is description elsewhere then we should link to it. If that description is using different terms then we should align the terms.

Author: Yeah, it's pretty surprising but I couldn't find any existing public docs on it. I created a placeholder `ApplicationModels.md` doc in the latest commits, but I think that probably requires its own PR

| `"1"` | Supports collaboration with 1.x clients. Uses a conservative set of runtime options. | `"1.0.0"` |
| `"2"` | Supports collaboration with 2.x clients only. Enables newer features (e.g., runtime ID compressor for SharedTree support). | `"2.0.0"` |

> **Note:** As new compatibility checkpoints are designated, a corresponding
> `CompatibilityMode` value will be added for each one (e.g., `"CC-1"` for
> checkpoint CC-1). When a checkpoint ages out of the compatibility window, its

> > mode is deprecated and eventually removed.

Author: This would be part of a follow up item shortly after this PR. It's probably not worth adding a note we will need to remove in the next PR.

The cross-client compatibility policy applies to both application models. Both models use the same underlying enforcement and feature-gating mechanisms. They differ only in how you configure them, which is described in the sections below.

##### Scope by Layer

In the **declarative model**, all layers are expected to use the same Fluid version, so the
18-month policy above is the only consideration.

The **encapsulated model** lets you mix versions across layers. If your
application does, each layer interacts with the policy differently:

> - **Driver:** No cross-client consideration — any driver version is

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
- **Driver:** No cross-client interactions — any driver version is
```

  compatible with any other.

> - **Loader:** Up to ~33 months apart across two clients. The Runtime ↔ Loader

Reviewer: I thought we said we should start with it tighter and in practice the 33 month span is not a concern.  (But it has the other problem of difficult to enforce - but a 3 year compat promise is quite a burden for agility)

  [layer-compat window](./LayerCompatibility.md#support-window-by-layer-boundary)
  is asymmetric (12 months backward, 3 months forward), stacking on top of
  the 18-month runtime window.
- **Runtime:** Up to ~18 months apart across two clients (the policy above).

> - **Datastore / DDSes:** Up to ~24 months apart across two clients. The

Reviewer: If we go with this, we need to update the `./FluidCompatibilityConsiderations.md#interaction-with-layer-compatibility` section to say it's _or_ not _and_.

I'm still in favor of _and_ if we can figure out how to do enforcement

If `minVersionForCollab` is not explicitly set, a conservative default is used (see `defaultMinVersionForCollab` in [compatibilityBase.ts](./packages/runtime/runtime-utils/src/compatibilityBase.ts)).

> We recommend maintaining `minVersionForCollab` at the latest release that your users are [saturated](#terminology) on which falls within the same supported compatibility checkpoint window as the version you intend to upgrade to. This will ensure:

Reviewer: > within the same supported compatibility checkpoint window as the version you intend to upgrade to

"the same supported compatibility checkpoint window" meaning within 3 checkpoints, or within 1 ("the same")?

Author: Honestly this whole sentence was pretty messy/confusing. I actually don't think checkpoints need to come into this recommendation at all, since setting minVersionForCollab to the oldest version your users are saturated on should be sufficient. Updated in latest

Reviewer: Yeah sounds good esp in conjunction with `lowestMinVersionForCollab` or whatver it's called

| `"1"` | Supports collaboration with 1.x clients. Uses a conservative set of runtime options. | `"1.0.0"` |
| `"2"` | Supports collaboration with 2.x clients only. Enables newer features (e.g., runtime ID compressor for SharedTree support). | `"2.0.0"` |

> **Note:** As new compatibility checkpoints are designated, a corresponding
> `CompatibilityMode` value will be added for each one (e.g., `"CC-4"` for
> checkpoint CC-4). When a checkpoint ages out of the compatibility window, its

> > mode is deprecated and eventually removed.

Reviewer 2: Let's talks about this one. I would favor not introducing "CC-#" as a fixed set in here.
I think we can special case "1" | "2" and otherwise just allow `MinimumVersionForCollab` to be specified.
I don't see a need to create another level of sophistication, and I think declarative users should be able to take advantage of finer grain control.

Author: Yeah I think that makes sense, I removed this for now. After this PR is checked in my first follow up PR will be to update the declarative model and we can discuss the details then.

> > mode is deprecated and eventually removed.

Reviewer 2: I think it is a necessity of this new policy, but we are talking about making an explicit `@public` breaking change in a **minor** version.
I think these doc changes should be accompanied by a documentation change to each of the APIs that currently accept `CompatibilityMode` to note that it acceptable values will change in minor versions (no more than once every 6 months).
API council will need to understand this exception.
Only major version removals will trigger API review, but the behavior change is very clearly breaking nonetheless. Maybe we should have a review triggered for any `defaultMinVersionForCollab` or `lowestMinVersionForCollab` updates.

Setting `minVersionForCollab` explicitly is **highly recommended**. Set it to the oldest Fluid Framework
version your users are [saturated](#terminology) on. This will ensure:

1. Older and newer clients can collaborate with each other safely.
2. Your application can leverage new Fluid Framework features as soon as they become safe for cross-client collaboration.

#### Best Practices

We recommend following the below pattern to ensure cross-client compatibility. Keeping your compatibility configuration up-to-date on an ongoing basis ensures you are always within a safe compatibility window.

1. Observe the distribution of Fluid versions across your application's clients. See [Observing Client Version Distribution](./FluidCompatibilityConsiderations.md#observing-client-version-distribution) for how to do this using telemetry.
2. Update your compatibility configuration to match the oldest deployed version that your clients are [saturated](#terminology) on:
    - **Declarative model**: Set `CompatibilityMode` to the value corresponding to that saturated version.
    - **Encapsulated model**: Set `minVersionForCollab` to the specific saturated version (e.g., `"2.10.0"`).

> 3. Verify that the configured compatibility checkpoint is within the supported compatibility window of the Fluid version you want to upgrade to. If it is, bump your Fluid dependencies and no further action is required. If not, wait for further saturation and return to step 1.

Reviewer 2: We should also recommend using a lock file from your package manager to ensure that newer version of Fluid Framework isn't picked up implicitly in case it might be beyond version that is compatible with current min.
Redistributors are in a particularly tricky situation where they don't want to specify semantic version beyond what is okay and yet we aren't telling them what that range is.

You may also set individual runtime options via `IContainerRuntimeOptions`, but they must be consistent with your `minVersionForCollab` value. If there is a mismatch (e.g., enabling a 2.x feature with `minVersionForCollab: "1.0.0"`), a `UsageError` will be thrown (see [Errors and Warnings to Monitor](#errors-and-warnings-to-monitor)).

> If `minVersionForCollab` is not explicitly set, the runtime uses a default derived from the currently supported compatibility checkpoints (see `defaultMinVersionForCollab` in [compatibilityBase.ts](./packages/runtime/runtime-utils/src/compatibilityBase.ts)). Passing a value below the supported floor is not permitted and will throw a `UsageError`.

Reviewer 2: We should say that setting a value is highly recommended.
I think we should plan a breaking change to make `minVersionForCollab` required in 3.0.

Reviewer 2: File under https://github.com/microsoft/FluidFramework/issues/23271

Author: Done - https://github.com/microsoft/FluidFramework/issues/27180

#### Best Practices

We recommend following the below pattern to ensure cross-client compatibility. Keeping your compatibility configuration up-to-date on an ongoing basis ensures you are always within a safe compatibility window.

1. Observe the distribution of Fluid versions across your application's clients. See [Observing Client Version Distribution](./FluidCompatibilityConsiderations.md#observing-client-version-distribution) for how to do this using telemetry.
2. Update your compatibility configuration to match the oldest deployed version that your clients are [saturated](#terminology) on:
   - **Declarative model**: Set `CompatibilityMode` to the value corresponding to that saturated version.
   - **Encapsulated model**: Set `minVersionForCollab` to the specific saturated version (e.g., `"2.10.0"`).
3. Verify that the configured compatibility checkpoint is within the supported compatibility window of the Fluid version you want to upgrade to. If it is, bump your Fluid dependencies and no further action is required. If not, wait for further saturation and return to step 1.

> 4. Monitor telemetry for warnings/errors to ensure safe rollout (see [Errors and Warnings to Monitor](#errors-and-warnings-to-monitor) below). At this point any clients that are not saturated may be blocked from accessing the document.

Reviewer 2: What does it mean for a single client to be "saturated"? I think you want to reword to note the minimum version.

> If `minVersionForCollab` is not explicitly set, a conservative default is used (see `defaultMinVersionForCollab` in [compatibilityBase.ts](./packages/runtime/runtime-utils/src/compatibilityBase.ts)).

Reviewer: Instead of saying "a conservative default is used", mention that the appropriate value based on CCs will be used?  And that providing a value lower than that will not be permitted.

1. Observe the distribution of Fluid versions across your application's clients. See [Observing Client Version Distribution](./FluidCompatibilityConsiderations.md#observing-client-version-distribution) for how to do this using telemetry.
2. Update your compatibility configuration to match the oldest deployed version that your clients are [saturated](#terminology) on:
   - **Declarative model**: Set `CompatibilityMode` to the value corresponding to that saturated version.
   - **Encapsulated model**: Set `minVersionForCollab` to the specific saturated version (e.g., `"2.10.0"`).
3. Verify that the configured compatibility checkpoint is within the supported compatibility window of the Fluid version you want to upgrade to. If it is, bump your Fluid dependencies and no further action is required. If not, wait for further saturation and return to step 1.
4. Monitor telemetry for warnings/errors to ensure safe rollout (see [Errors and Warnings to Monitor](#errors-and-warnings-to-monitor) below). At this point any clients that are not saturated may be blocked from accessing the document.

> #### Errors and Warnings to Monitor

Reviewer: We should add a fatal error for passing a too-low minVersionForCollab

Author: We already have it implemented, I added it to the error table in latest

| Telemetry Event | `MinVersionForCollabWarning` | Clients are joining with a version below your configured minimum, but are still able to understand the document's data format and therefore continue to collaborate. | If you see this warning message, it's likely a sign you updated `minVersionForCollab` too quickly. In future releases, ensure proper [saturation](#terminology) before updating. If these warning messages are ignored, you may risk seeing the below error in the future. |

> | `DataProcessingError` | `Document can't be opened with current version of the code` | An out-of-window client tried to join and was blocked due to being unable to collaborate with the newer client's document. | If this was unexpected, lower `minVersionForCollab` to allow older clients to join. |

Reviewer 2: Once this happens in a particular document, is there any way to go back? This feels like you can rollback to prevent more problems, but are there lasting ones already? If there isn't recovery for certain clients accessing impacted documents, that should be called out.
